---
title: "Plato and the deviation from the base form
vs. Heraclitus and the truth of deviation"
excerpt: ""
collection: portfolio
---
When reveling in tà metà tà physikà I liked Plato’s idea of a "realm of perception" and a "realm of ideas" (Plato: idéas and eídos). It is a bold idea. I like it for that it is a bold idea. But I don’t join him in his concept that the realm of ideas contains the real beauty by inheriting the basic forms of all that is. When wandering around, eyes focusing a target, I more than ever see beauty in deviation.
To give a recent example: I’m standing at a lectern, though not for giving speech but rather to, behind this, prepare a meal for the customer. I am the customer. Behind the meal-preparer my eyes acknowledge a door. Wooden, seemingly provisionally build. Not a form of the „Ideenwelt“ by any means. Not nearly the door of all doors. But still, it binds my eyes. In this so non-prototypical, so weird and deviating door, I see beauty. In its own merit. I smile. Plato was a great thinker, no doubts, but he didn’t seem to acknowledge the deviation, which is the reality’s will to choose its own path, apart from its originator, the realm of ideas. Because it may be its originator but it by far is not its ruler.

To capture this I revise Plato’s famous allegory of the cave with my own:
There at some time were some women and men. They lived in a cave which had many holes in its ceiling, which let sunlight shine through, lightening the interior. Every now and then a bird would find a place in one of the cave’s holes. Stopping some of the sun beams a shadow would fall on the cave’s floor. Depending on which hole the bird found its place in, the shadow would differ in size and shape. The cave dwellers would see the shadows and they would imagine creatures, a different one for every different shadow for every different place the bird found in the ceiling holes. They knew that the creatures were not so far apart as only sizes and shapes differed, but not their form (morphḗ) itself and not their material (hýlē) (I borrow from Aristotle here). So they knew, that the creatures were born from one idea. One day the bird, lured by a crumb of bread, found its way deep into the cave, landing on the cave's floor. There the cave dwellers saw the creatures’ mysterious source. They saw their original form. While interested in this achievement in knowing they also said: „This original form might be the truth of forms, but isn’t it true in its very own merit, that the deviations have their reality. Why are the deviations less true than the bird itself? Shouldn’t they get the chance to be judged independent from where they come from. To be judged by what they themselves can bring forth? We see beauty in all of them and beauty in them as a whole, therefore, in deviation from truth. As, doesn’t deviation from truth inherit its very own truth?“ But not just that, the different sizes and shapes had also let them appreciate diversity among themselves. From then on they knew the real source of the different creatures, but worshipped the different creatures anyway, as they had taught them beauty in deviation and acceptance among themselves.
As you might see, true form is not the only truth we can find in Plato’s idea of perception and idéas or eídos. Couldn’t it be, that truth lies in both of them, as the story asks. That would mean, truth lies in truth and truth lies in the deviation from truth. Isn’t this second truth a truth to be acknowledged in its own merit?
Concluding, acknowledging deviation as a truthful aspect of our world leads us to understand that change is the constant that rules our life. It is more so than stability which Plato had tried to establish with his realm of ideas.
Which let's us conclude with "[n]o man ever steps in the same river twice, for it's not the same river and he's not the same man." (Heraclitus)
A deviating river, which through its constant deviation is constantly changing. A deviating man, who through his constant deviation is constantly changing.
